When you're two ready.
What is your full name?
Susan Elizabeth Cleary.
Do we have permission to record this interview?
Yes you do.
Where and when were you born?
I was born in Cardiff, October 25th 1952.
How did you meet Father Paul Zottori?
I met him when he was serving as a priest in the parish in Harroford West.
What's your earliest memory or memories of Father Zottori?
The earliest memories are probably because my husband was living in a flat in Harroford West.
First time away from home he had as always gone to the Catholic Church to make himself known.
Our first memories of him were welcoming us into the parish.
Knowing that he liked to go out for a drink, he would go out for a drink sometimes with the boys.
Seeing him riding around Harroford West on his motorbike.
Thinking my goodness me this is more than a priest, this is a real bloke.
Our first meeting with him and getting to know him was as newcomers to the parish.
When did you move to Harroford West?
Rory was there in 1974.
I joined him later after we got married in 1975.
So he really struck you as being unconventional for a priest?
Yes, very unconventional as a priest.
Someone who liked to mix with the young people, he was young himself really.
Someone who liked to mix with the young people, liked to get to know the young people.
Unconventional in as much as the things that he would say during mass led you to believe that he was so much more than just a priest.
That sounds silly. He was a human being first and foremost with his faults and his admissions to his faults.
I remember one occasion during a service he had berated the congregation because we had another priest there, a parish priest who was older and not as interesting.
People would put their heads around the door and if they saw it was the older priest they would go away and come back when Father Sartori was saying mass.
On one Sunday, oh my goodness me, he let rip. He said to us all, you do not come to church for the priest.
He said you come to worship God.
We were all quaking in our seats but we didn't take any notice of him.
We still only went to listen to him preach because he was a good preacher.
Another occasion during a service which was one of the reasons why I felt that he was so much so human was it was during the consecration and he was literally holding the host up and he stopped.
And he looked at us and he said, how many of you actually believe this is the body of Christ?
And I was like, oh my gosh, you know, this is the priest asking us because he said, sometimes I don't believe it.
I doubt.
And he says, I have to work really hard at reminding myself of why I'm here and the importance of this moment in the service.
And it really hit home to me that here was a man who was not just a man, he was a priest who was able to say, it's not plain sailing.
We all have doubts and it's OK.
And that as a young adult made me feel this is OK.
This is good. This is what the church should be about.
And that's that was one of his his strengths was bringing religion into your everyday life and making you feel that it was OK to have doubts.
And maybe some days you didn't think it was right.
And it was fine. It was OK.
And that helped me a lot with my faith as a young adult.
We all struggle with, you know, is this the right thing to do?
Do we really want this anymore?
And he yeah, he really kept me in the church for a long time because of his philosophy and his way of reaching out to people and making making them feel that the mass was for them.
Church was for them. It wasn't just the priests and holy people and saints.
It was for everybody, you know.
So that was that was my experience of him in Haverford West.
Later on, I think I told you he married us.
And Rory and I were married in 1975 in Cardiff, which was where we were both from originally.
And our parish priest at the time agreed that Father Paul could actually come to Cardiff and marry us.
And now before the wedding, traditionally Rory had a stag night to which Father Paul went.
And on the day itself, June the 19th, 1975, July the 19th, I arrived at the church in the car and I was told by the usher, could you go around the block?
I thought, oh, crumbs, the groom hasn't arrived, you know, is it?
So off I go around the block.
Come back.
Could you go round again?
The priest hasn't turned up.
Oh, no.
What I've got to do is driving up from Haverford West.
So I went around a third time.
And when I got there, there he was.
Bright as a ray of sunshine.
Hi, everything all right?
Yes.
Come on in.
And he was all robed up and into the church we went.
Lovely service.
We got to the sermon.
And he said to the congregation, just sit down and talk among yourselves.
And he said, I've got to say it's only for Rory and Sue.
So we sat there with our backs to the congregation.
And, you know, I can't for the life of me remember what he said.
But all I know is he had us in fits of laughter.
And the congregation could just see our shoulders going up and down, up and down, laughing at whatever it was that he said to us.
But he didn't want to share it with the congregation, just for us.
That was a nice little personal touch.
So that was my those are my main memories about Father Paul.
Later on, when he became sick, Rory had been moved to Swansea and he went to visit him in the hospital.
And of course, because of his illness, he was lying face down.
It was very difficult to sort of converse with him.
Very tragic, very sad, great loss taken far too soon.
But I think in the short time that he was there, he touched the hearts of so many people.
And you'll know yourselves that that legend is still alive with all the Paul Sartori Foundation and all the charity shops.
And we were actually down in Tembe last Easter.
And we said, we're going to have a little ride into Nailyne and West.
Have a look around.
And we were in Nailyne and there was a Paul Sartori charity shop.
And I said, we've got to go in and we've got to buy something.
I don't care what it is.
You've just got to go in.
And the lady in there, we told her that we knew him and she said, well, she didn't know him.
She was too young to know him.
But she said the number of people who go into the shop just because they remember him and they just want to keep his memory alive,
keep that foundation going, keep giving as he did, giving all the time.
Wonderful man.
Absolutely wonderful.
How would you describe him as a person?
Fun, a little outrageous perhaps.
And kind.
I think the kindness and this, the willingness to get to know people, to take the time to talk to them, whether it was in the pub or after mass or whatever, he was, he always had time for people.
And I think those, I think the fun thing is the one thing I remember most.
He liked to laugh.
He liked a joke.
He liked a bit of fun.
And he, yeah, he always was always smiling.
You know, he was always a happy chappy.
Yeah, that's how I would describe him.
Thank you.
I think you've probably anticipated this to some extent, but do you have any other favorite stories about Father Paul?
No, I think the two most, my two favorite were the wedding and the occasion at mass.
I think those are my absolute favorites.
Thank you.
And we always ask the interviewees, did Father Paul impact your life in some way?
Well, obviously he married you and your husband, so that's a fundamental influence.
Can you think of any other impact he might have had?
Sorry?
Well, I think, as I said in the beginning, he kept me in the church.
He kept my faith going for a long time, to time when perhaps, you know, a lot of young people would have been leaving the church, early 20s.
And, yeah, so that was an impact.
And I will never forget, you know, the things that he said.
And, you know, now, I mean, I did leave the church for a while.
I'm back.
And I often think about what he used to say.
And I think that's the biggest impact he's had on my life is my religion.
Really.
Okay, thank you.
And I know this is a difficult question, but if you could sum up Father Paul in three words, what would they say?
What would they be?
Fun, as I said.
Unconventional, which was a word you used.
And sincere.
Thank you.
And is there anything, finally, else you'd like to mention?
I don't think so.
I think I've said everything that I need to.
Well, thank you.
Thank you so much.
So it's been really, really useful having you share your memories of Father Paul with us.
And very, very grateful.
And good to see you across the Irish Sea.